#1.2 Machine Translation & its up-to-date improvement.

 

As stated by John Hutchins ‘machine
translation (MT) refers to computerized systems responsible for the production
of translations without human assistance. A distinction is commonly made
between human-aided MT (HAMT) and machine-aided human translation (MAHT)”.
(Hutchins 501) The latter one translates the text by using access to tools like
>“on-line dictionaries, remote terminology databanks, transmission and reception
of texts, stores of previously translated texts (‘translation memories’), and
integrated resources, commonly referred to as translation workstations or
translator workbenches.” (Hutchins 502) Despite HAMT and MAHT there exists also
one more method of MT namely CAT, which stands for computer-aided translation.
The main aim of machine translation is to create a decent translation without interference of a human; however,
in most cases it is not possible since the output text has to be revised by a
human translator anyway. In this case, the MT does not differ from human-made
translations since both has to be revised, and corrected by a third party in
order to avoid mistakes; however, types of those mistakes are different because
in case of MT they are of much greater importance for instance ‘incorrect
prepositions, articles,  pronouns, verb
tenses etc.” (Hutchins 502) Nonetheless, machine translation does not always
have to be error-free since someone may use it in order to get familiar just
with the main subject of a given text, and in those cases the raw output works
just fine. The quality of machine translation may be enriched in three ways.
Firstly by marking (pre-editing) the input text to ‘indicate prefixes,
suffixes, word divisions, phrase and clause boundaries, or grammatical
categories’ (Hutchins 502) for example by distinguishing two homonymous or
homographic words in order to avoid ambiguity in the output text. The second,
and more common, way is >‘the control of the vocabulary and of the grammatical
structures of texts submitted for translation’. (Hutchins 502) Finally yet
importantly, the systems may be specifically set for one area of a subject
(sublanguages). Machine translations can be divided in two ways: according to
number of languages, one may distinguish ‘bilingual’ and ‘multilingual’
systems, and according to direction, MT may be ‘unidirectional’ and
‘bidirectional’. Bilingual translations occur only between two languages, and
are both unidirectional and multidirectional. One may distinguish three
different types of translations. First, which is the oldest one, is called
direct translation or according to Hutchins “binary translation”. In this type,
the text is converted directly from one “source” text to the other “target”
text. The main purpose of this translation is to limit the required amount of
semantic and syntactic analysis in order to avoid ambiguity of a source
language. Another MT method is ‘interlingua approach’. This method bases on
assumption that >‘it is possible to convert SL texts into semantico-syntactic
representations which are common to more than one language (but not necessarily
‘universal’ in any sense).’ (Hutchins 503) In this approach, translation is
divided into two stages: first, which converts the source language into
interlingua form, and second, which changes the interlingua form to target
language. The main advantage of this method ‘is economy of effort in a
multilingual environment, i.e an analysis program for a particular source
language can be used for more than one target language, and a generation
program for a particular target language can be used again’ (Hutchins 503).
However, the advantage of this approach is on the other hand its main
disadvantage since it increases its density. Third method is transfer. In this
strategy, there are three different stages. First stage >‘converts source
language into abstract source language-oriented representations’, second stage
‘converts these into equivalent target language-oriented representations’, and
the third one ‘generates the final target language texts.’ (Hutchins 504) The
process of analysis within can be divided into several stages: morphological,
where word endings, and their compounds are identified, syntactic, during which
‘phrase structures, dependency, subordination etc.’ (Hutchins, 504) are
analyzed, semantic, which identifies ‘resolution of lexical and structural
ambiguities’. (Hutchins, 504) The synthesis phase can as well undergo three
stages: semantic, which is responsible for selection of appropriate lexical and
structural form, syntactic, which generates required structures of phrase or
sentence, and morphological, which generates correct forms of words. 

[]![Different types of rule based machine translations(https://www.researchgate.net/figure/Different-methods-of-Rule-based-machine-translation_fig1_275947715)

                                               

However, in older versions of ‘direct translation’ systems the above components
were nor always divided as clearly as it is with newer systems. The previous
versions of systems used to mix data from dictionaries with grammatical ones
and thus latter in latter system different degrees modularity was introduced ‘
so that system components, data, and programs can be adapted and changed with
minimal damage to overall efficiency’ (Hutchins, 504)

The introduction of modularity in older systems led to introduction of
‘representations and processing rules for reversibility, i.e. the data
transformations used in the analysis of a particular language are applied in
reverse when generating texts in that language.’ (Hutchins, 504)  The ‘direct translation’ is characteristic to
the ‘first generation’ of machine translation which lasted ‘from the 1950s to
the mid-1970s’. Other two, interlingua and transfer-based system are associated
with the ‘second generation’ (during the 1970s and 1980s). (Hutchins, 504) Both
of those generations are strictly connected with rules, ‘(for morphology,
syntax, lexical selection, semantic analysis, and generation)’ and that is why
they are referred to as rule-based systems, which differentiates them from more
up-to-date corpus-based systems. The main issue concerning translation systems
is ‘the resolution of lexical and structural ambiguities, both within languages
(monolingual ambiguity) and between languages (bilingual ambiguity).’
(Hutchins, 505) Monolingual disambiguation are present in all natural
languages, and it makes a ‘difficulty in translation since there may be more
than one possible target language equivalent’. (Hutchins, 505) Not only the
number of target language may be problematic, but also homographs and polysemes,
which have to be determined before the translation is made. Bilingual
ambiguities, on the other hand, happen when ‘the target language has
distinctions absent in the source language’ (Hutchins, 505) for example
‘English eat can be German essen or fressen; English wall can be French mur or
paroi […]’ (Hutchins, 505). One may avoid such choices by picking a single,
most acceptable equivalent from a target language for a source language or by including
phrases which correspond to a target language’s idioms or compounds, which will
allow to differentiate the meaning of the very same word on its own, and
included in an idiomic or compound expression. 